search contexts (#4740)
elastic/docs-content: solutions/search/the-search-api.md

## Search timeout [search-timeout]

> Search requests do not time out by default. The request waits for complete results from every shard before returning a response as outlined in the [basic read model](/deploy-manage/distributed-architecture/reading-and-writing-documents.md#_basic_read_model).

Author: The search timeout applies only to the sub-portion of the read model once you get into the shard. This is to say it does not apply to any other part of that flow. That might make more sense post-link once https://github.com/elastic/docs-content-internal/issues/110 is added as requested. But later says "search timeout doesn't apply to everything only shard-level" and to explain that this link says what everything else is that this doesn't cover.

You can set a [`timeout` value](https://www.elastic.co/docs/api/doc/elasticsearch/operation/operation-search) to apply per shard, starting when the query phase begins on that shard. It does not enforce an overall search-level timeout. If a shard exceeds the `timeout` value, it returns partial results and the search response will be marked as `timed_out` of `true`.

For example response, if the `timeout` duration was surpassed for at least one shard, the API response will return a HTTP 200 status code and the response body field `timed_out` will report `true`.

```json
{
 "took" : 11,
  "timed_out" : true,
  "_shards" : {
    "total" : 40,
    "successful" : 40,
    "skipped" : 0,
    "failed" : 0
  },
  "hits" : {
    "total" : {
      "value" : 98393, // possibly incomplete value
      "relation" : "eq"
    },
    // ... 
  }
}
```

> If a particular search request should should error out instead of returning partial results, consider overriding [`default_allow_partial_results` setting](https://www.elastic.co/docs/api/doc/elasticsearch/operation/operation-search) to `false`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a particular search request should error out instead of returning partial results, consider setting the [`default_allow_partial_results` setting](https://www.elastic.co/docs/api/doc/elasticsearch/operation/operation-search) to `false`.
```

> You can set a fallback cluster-wide default  `timeout` for all search requests by configuring the `search.default_search_timeout` cluster setting. In this case, the request will be cancelled using the [task cancellation API](https://www.elastic.co/docs/api/doc/elasticsearch/operation/operation-tasks-cancel).

Reviewer: what does "in this case" mean? 

```suggestion
You can set a fallback cluster-wide default timeout for all search requests by configuring the `search.default_search_timeout` cluster setting. In this case, the request will be cancelled using the [task cancellation API]({{es-apis}}/operation/operation-tasks-cancel).
```

Author: AFAIK not all timeouts use the task cancellation api , only the default search timeout is guaranteed to

:::{note}

> The `search.default_search_timeout` setting's resolution sensitivity is based from expert setting `thread_pool.estimated_time_interval` which defaults to `200ms`. This means the minimum meaningful impact threshold for `search.default_search_timeout` would also be `200ms`. Elastic recommends against overriding this expert setting as it has far reaching impact.

Author: If you set it below 200ms, say 0ms, you'll only see results for ≥200ms. It's the polling interval so while the API accepts a lower threshold, your impact threshold minimum is 200ms not lower
